We're rolling and we're talking to Nora Keller.
Why don't we just dispense with the, the first question must always be that, you know, how much of this is biographical?
I've read a few features.
Part of this is inspired by a woman that you covered as a news story.
Is that right or something like that?
Well, I had just gone out to hear a lecture at the University of Hawaii.
The speaker was a Korean.
woman who had survived their comfort camps during World War II and her name was Kim Jon Hwang. So she gave a little bit about her experience in the camps and what she was speaking out about was that she wanted people to know that these camps existed. This was in the you know early 90s when a lot of people hadn't heard about what had gone on and it was before the Japanese government offered their apology so she was speaking out to let people know what had happened and to try to get the Japanese government to acknowledge
the existence of the camps and to apologize for them.
And how well had she adjusted?
I mean, your character, of course, doesn't cope very well with this experience at all.
How had this particular, this actual woman?
She did that off her personal life, but she did say that she, after she left her camp as a young woman, she never went back to see her family.
She just felt like she can't fight in her shame and go over a cat.
Go back to see anybody in her family.
That might be a story.
And she's going to have family with her.
Now, you, of course, being, uh, uh, uh, Canadian ancestry and heritage, uh, uh, I, uh, I gather, I mean, is this, uh, tell me about the various factors that came into play to that occasion in the writing of this book?
As I heard, in your homespeed, I was so off, you know, at a deep level that I started dreaming about, about her, I had dreams about it, and I had images of the camp, I had images of war, and just really, um, horrible flashes of, um, maybe I had my dreams, and so one night I,
So they're like that research aspect of the book that came into town.
And there's also some bits and pieces of my life growing up in Hawaii as a Korean-American, so there's a piece of people that I know.
And in the end, I don't know who was the woman who went through the chaos.
She's not really based on anyone's person.
She's more of a composite of people.
But she said she's inspired by the woman.
Oh, definitely.
What?
She was the... Yeah, she did this while in... Was she 12 as well in the sun?
And were they sold, actually, or they just taken?
Amazing.
Well, you have this, of course, as for you, too.
I'm making a novel.
That's a great story.
I did this.
I come from my dreams as well.
The dreams, you know, I guess.
[Scratched record.]
Okay, here we go.
We're taping again.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
We were talking.
I think that was it.
So that I was able to imagine the daily life as I can.
Your background, this is your first novel.
Yes.
Did you train to be a novelist?
No.
I had no idea what I was doing for that.
You know, and that's why, I mean, when I first heard this woman speak at the university, I, you know, my first reaction was like, oh my goodness, this story needs to be heard.
Somebody needs to write about this story.
You know, I was saying somebody, somebody.
I wasn't saying me.
But you were thinking in terms of a factual, non-fictional treatment.
Is that right?
I was just thinking of, actually, I was thinking that it was a story that needed to be heard in many forms.
And I thought, oh,
I had wondered why I hadn't heard it non-fiction.
I also knew that it should be talked about fictionally too because through fiction we can get the emotions, we can get another side of the story.
And I had written short stories so I was thinking about fiction a lot too.
But I wasn't thinking that I should be the one to write about this at all because
You know, up to that point, I had just done, you know, short stories.
I had done some book reviews for the newspaper.
I had done, you know, bits and pieces of things.
So, you know, I wouldn't have thought that I would be able to write a novel.
First time.
I know.
I really, and I didn't know how to do it or how to structure it.
So at the beginning, I had to think of each chapter as kind of like a story in itself.
so that it was only about two-thirds through that I began to work with the whole structure of the novel.
You know, up until then I was just taking chunks of it.
At what point did you think, I mean, attempting alternate points of view is not exactly, I mean, that's kind of an advanced technique.
I read a lot.
I've read a lot.
You know, I'm a voracious reader so that, I guess, if anything, that would be my training.
And I think that's anybody's training to write, you know.
I bet you jump around with tenses and stuff, too.
It's a pretty ambitious structure.
And I also understand that you belong to a writer's group.
Is that right?
I do.
And so I would get a chapter done, and we belong to a monthly group.
So each month I would say, OK, I need to get a draft of this chapter done so I can show it to the group.
And so that kind of gave me a timeline or a date to work with.
And then I would bring it to the group, and they'd
give me comments and I go home and rework the chapter and then start the new one, the new chapter.
How's the group done as a rule?
Have they gotten many things published out of it?
Oh, they're just, you know, it's so tremendous.
They're just such a wonderful group of writers.
And yes, there's Loisan Yamanaka, whose third book and second novel just came out this month.
Really?
Yeah, and there's... What's the title of that?
Blue's Hanging.
And who published it?
Farrar Strauss.
Oh, really?
Yeah, and it's just such a great book, I mean, right?
Well, great.
In fact, we got to read together in New York.
Well, that must have been interesting.
Yeah, that was... Do you see yourself as a... I hesitate to use the expression a regional writer, but, you know, we do have wonderful regional...
bodies of work in the United States.
Do you see yourself as a Hawaiian writer, a Korean-American writer, a women's writer?
How do you see yourself?
Emerging from what?
I actually see myself as all of those.
I'm of two minds with the labels or the categories.
On the one hand, I'm very proud to be a writer from Hawaii.
I'm proud to be a Korean-American writer.
I'm proud to be, you know, a woman writer, you know, so all of those things.
And I really see them as sources of strength in my writing.
And, you know, and there's, you know, but, you know, however the category is, I also recognize that in a sense that, you know, whatever the category is, it's kind of superficial in the way that it doesn't affect what I write.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, of course it does, yeah.
Yeah, and so I write what I write.
And so it's interesting, in a way, to see all the different categories that it comes up in, all the different ways that people label my writing in terms of just how they talk about it.
On the other hand, it worries me that if somebody thinks of my book as, oh, that's just a Korean-American
that's a Korean-American book or that's an Asian-American book or that other people might feel like, oh, I, you know, might not feel like they have access to the book, that it doesn't connect to them in any way.
Same if people, I've heard people say, oh, that's a woman's book.
Well, I think that would be the biggest threat, actually.
Not so much Korean-American, but that, because let's face it, Amy Tan has millions of readers and has no problem living with the...
But I think the question of being a book for women, you know, is something you might have to defend because, you know, in terms of male, the male characters, it's awfully hard to find any men in there that you'd be pleased to call your friend, you know.
I know, and I realize that because I'm writing from the perspective of these two women who are just in very specific circumstances, you know, like Akiko's certainly not going to have, you know, fond feelings toward men of any, you know.
Even the missionary, you know.
Yeah, anybody.
I mean, just that whole...
She feels totally disconnected to everybody, men, but also women too, and it's only her daughter that provides any link to the living for her.
It's the only thing that she loves.
So, I mean, coming from that character and her specific circumstances and also how she's going to pass on those feelings about men toward her daughter, I mean, those two women are going to see men in a very particular way.
So I totally recognize that in a sense.
But I hate to think that men will feel like, oh, I can't read it or I won't.
Well, let's face it, it's going to have to be recommended to them, and they'll respond to it.
Have you heard from any men?
You know, that's what's been so great.
I mean, I think that's one of the best parts about going on this tour and doing readings at the workshop because
I get to meet people who are actually reading it.
And when I first went out and I was told, oh, this is a book that will appeal to women, you know, primarily, but I've gone out and I've gone to different bookstores and I see that there's quite a large percentage of men there too.
So, you know, it makes me feel relieved in the sense that men are reading it.
Do you have a sense of the reader?
Did you have a sense of the reader when you were writing it or were you writing for yourself?
I was writing for myself, but the people that I really felt like I was writing for was one, my mother, and one for my young daughter, who's just three now.
That's great.
But for the woman that I hope that she'll become, you know.
that I envision her one day.
And so, but you know, the whole irony is neither one of them can read it at this moment, you know?
Well, but you have them in your... Yeah, but those are the people foremost in my mind while I was writing this particular book.
At what point did you hear the voices of the women?
Did you hear the voices?
Did they establish their voices as characters?
Akiko was very early on.
I mean, you know, I think she was kind of in... She actually was narrating my dreams at a certain point.
Really?
Yeah, I mean, I heard her very strong.
So I wrote all her chapters first without really knowing how I would place them in order.
And then after I got Akiko's done, and I knew I wanted to have a daughter, and when I got to Becca's voice...
Yeah, she came early, but I saw her as almost a response to the mother's chanters.
Like, here's Akiko, the first generation, and this is how Becca responds or interacts with what has come before her.
Very interesting.
Are you working on another novel now?
Yes, I am.
I'm actually kind of playing with two different ideas for two different novels, and both of those two novels
I do deal with Korean American issues, Korean American themes.
I'm really interested in the process of immigration and how in immigration people change their identities.
I mean, it's almost like it's a transformation of identity and how families become restructured.
So I'm really interested in that whole.
Of course, you talk about identities.
Your character here, her name is taken from her.
You talk about identity.
what greater metaphor is there for identity than a name, you know?
Yeah, and that's totally historically based, you know, like when the Japanese occupied Korea from 1910, I mean, that was one of the first things, you know, Japanese, I mean, no Korean names, no Korean language, customs.
So you're right, that's really almost an attempt to squash that whole Korean identity.
Now you say your mother can't read this?
No, she can't read English very well.
Unless it's translated, or unless I sit down and read it to her over a week or so.
She won't be able to hear the story.
So how is your Korean?
My Korean is terrible.
I mean, terrible.
And I think that's, you know, when my mom came to the U.S.
and we had settled in, actually, before coming to Hawaii, we were in, like, Minnesota and Florida and Ohio.
She was very conscious of her accent of not being able to speak English, very conscious of her foreignness, and she saw that as a real liability.
So she really made a decision not to teach me anything.
Korean language.
She didn't want me to be stigmatized in any way.
It's too bad, isn't it?
Yeah, it's just so sad.
And that was like in the late 60s, early 1970s, so it really wasn't considered a plus to learn a second.
Yeah, well, my parents are Greek, and I just wish I could speak, you know, and they didn't teach it to my brother or myself for the same precise reason.
They wanted us to be perceived as Americans, you know.
Right.
And it really is sad.
It is sad because I'm terrible at languages, and I couldn't learn it out if I tried.
I wish I really had that language.
Yeah, I really do feel kind of a sense of loss because of that.
And maybe that's why I write, too, is to try to.
reclaim some connection with Korean identity.
But how about stories?
Have the stories been passed on?
Well, my mother and also my older brother told a lot of stories.
And, you know, so like the folk tales in the book are actual Korean folk tales.
Now, let's say you were not Korean-American and you still had witnessed this talk that this woman gave.
Do you think you still would have been motivated to write about her?
I mean, would you have been moved to the degree that you were?
That's really hard to say.
Interesting, isn't it?
You certainly couldn't have written the same novel because it had to come from that Korean... I think that kind of that whole...
But it's such an atrocity that, I mean, it's on a level that it's so hard to even comprehend.
I mean, I can't even imagine something like that, really.
But I think it affects everybody, just the horrendousness of it.
But I don't think I could have written the novel that I did.
No, I'm sure you couldn't have.
Maybe it would have been different.
It's been some century, hasn't it, when you come right down.
I did an interview last week with Norman Mailer, of all people.
I'm writing that up right now.
And, you know, he is a very interesting man.
What he says is, you know, why has there not been an important philosopher over the last 50 years?
Because it's impossible to deal with the Holocaust.
And you think of, you know, the atrocities that you're writing about.
How do you say, how is it possible for these things to happen in the middle of the 20th century?
But, you know, it's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah, it is.
And you know what's scary, too, is that, like, this whole, um, the comfort camps, it still exists, too.
I mean, it wasn't just 50 years ago, but, you know, it kind of mutated, and it's taken on new forms, and it still goes on in different countries, you know, like the sex tourism trade.
Oh, terrible.
And in Bosnia.
You know, so you have...
The situation going on, it's just, that's what I, yeah.
Human nature.
It happens to still go on in this century, in this day and age when we consider ourselves so enlightened.
So you have a three-year-old daughter?
Yes.
And how do you spell her name?
T-A-E.
They were born on the same day.
You're kidding.
No.
My older sister is also born on that day.
Which is what?
October 9th.
Wow.
So that for three generations now, the oldest daughter to have a daughter.
Isn't that amazing?
Has been born on October 9th.
Well, I mean, there must be some sort of Oriental Asian.
There must be.
Something that has something to say about that.
Yeah, there must be.
I shouldn't have to date in some kind of, you know.
Oh, that's good.
But, yeah, there must be some kind of karmic or genetic thing.
The only thing I have that comes close to that is that my Labrador retriever and I have the same birthday.
Oh, what?
Which is May 25th.
You guys are connected.
She is.
She's going to be nine this year, and I'm somewhat older.
Anyway, I think we've got plenty of stuff here, and I thank you for taking the time to talk to me.
Thanks for rescheduling.
Oh, it's fine.
I'm happy to talk to you.
What a disaster.
That's fine.
So your daughter is not traveling with you?
No, and that's really hard to be away from home.
I'll bet.
Anxious to go home and be with her.
Yeah, I've got two daughters myself, and they're 15 and 14, close together.
And girls are great, I have to tell you that.
They really are.
They're lots of fun.
They're wonderful.
Well, nice talking to you.
Have a safe trip home.
Thank you.
And I hope we meet sometime on the occasion of the next book.
And congratulations.
It's really quite a wonderful book, and the reviews have just been outstanding, so you should be very proud.
Thanks.
Okay, talk to you later.
Bye-bye.
Bye.